
ADA-Project
Decolonization Data Story

Introduction

Colonialism is often associated with the European Empires that were expanded in the last three centuries. However, it is not a modern phenomenon as many ancient civilizations relied on colonies to expand their influence on the world. Among them, one can cite the Greeks and Romans, the Ottomans and the Moors. The first massive colonial expansion happened in the Americas with Spain and Portugal mastering the new navigation techniques. Those colonizing empires were then able to extend their political sovereignty on foreign lands by sending large numbers of colons. (source: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/colonialism/)
We will try to understand if by gaining their sovereignty, the former colonies truly achieved the freedom they expected.
To better understand the variations in the current state of former colonies, we first need to look at who were their colonizers. From there, we can observe the variations in the decolonization process. We finally look at the conflicts post-decolonization to better assess the political stability of the former colonies.

Datasets

As the UCDP dataset focuses on conflicts in the period after the Second World War, we will look at the decolonization process of the former European Colonial Empires during the XIXth and XXth centuries. 
We are creating our own dataset for the European colonies using this list [hyperlien : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_former_European_colonies]. Therefore, it links the different European powers to their colonies. By scraping the linked wikipedia pages of the colonized countries, the independence date and other meaningful values can be used to extend our current dataset.
To Do : More details to add / Precise that we confond colonialism with Imperialism for our study

 Colonial Empires

Graph 1 . Most Colonizing countries

We begin our analysis by looking at the biggest colonial empires, looking at the number of colonies rather than their sizes. The barplot above shows us that the United Kingdom was the biggest Empire of this era, comforted by literature as it was the biggest empire in human history.

Graph 2 . Map of Colonies

The map is helping to better visualize what were the colonial interests of the different superpowers. 
Russia was always focused on limitrophe colonies for boundary expansion. It began through the XV to XVII centuries to expand the territory up to the Sea of Okhotsk, up to the Pacific Ocean on the Asian side. The Soviet Union continued to eatables its boundaries by taking control of various countries from the balkans up to Eastern Europe, as can be seen on the map above.
On another hand, Portuguese and Spanish colonies established influence over the American continent, bringing their languages and religions to the locals. 
Finally the British and French Empire were the one that expanded the most, through North America, to Africa and even to Asia. Both countries still possess up to this day territories in various continents. France established new political systems to keep its influence in its territories, with the overseas territories and regions (DOM-TOM), and even in its former colonies with the Francophonie and the Franc CFA. TO DO -> EXTEND THIS PART
The United-Kingdom created the Commonwealth TO DO -> EXTEND THIS PART

Decolonization

Graph 1. Decolonization over time

The decolonization process began during the XVIIIth century and continues up to this day with the separation of Sudan and South Sudan in 2011. The temporal evolution of the number of independence declared brings important informations about the tendencies that initiated them. We observe various waves of independencies, a first one happening during the first half of the XIXth century. To do : LOOK TO WHAT BROUGHT THE INDEPENDANCIES IN THE FORMER SPANISH TERRITORIES. 
Then the movement slew down during the second half of this century. The First World War begins manifests a new spike of independencies, before the biggest wave that occurred after the Second World War. It began as a first batch directly after the war, until a second that occurred in the 1960s. The main decolonization finished at the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.

Graph 2. Map of Decolonization

It is informative to link major historic events to the process of decolonization as it could explain some of the wave that we observe. However, another interaction needs to be taken into account to better understand the wave process: spatial interaction. The map presented above regroup the different dates of decolonization through the years. One can first observe that the first decolonization mainly occurred in the Americas during the end of the XVIIIth and the first half of the XIXth century. Then came a wave of english independencies with Canada, Australia, South America and Egypt during the second half of the XIXth century.
Africa declare mainly its independence after the Second World War, leading to many violent conflicts that we’ll talk about later.
The last independencies happened at the fall of the Soviet Union, with the independence of Ukraine, the Balkans, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.


 Study of different Independence Movements (Maybe not necessaryc)
SYRIA


INDIA


ALGERIA






Conflicts post-decolonization

Our problematic wants to overview the stability of the former colonies. For our analysis as we are using the UCDP dataset, we will mainly look at the conflicts in which the former colonies are implicated. With this mindset, an unstable colony would be one with many conflicts happening on its territory. To have a better visualization, we also include a second UCDP dataset that also takes into account more regional conflicts. It will then be able to show civil war conflicts inside a country.

Graph 1. Number of conflicts per year and per continent

The graph presented above present the number of conflicts per year and per continent. Some tendencies can be assessed from there. The number of conflicts grew after the second world war to reach a maximum at the end of the Cold War in 1991, then went down until 2013 that led us to the higher number of conflicts since the Second World War. 

Graph 2. Number of conflicts per year in Europe (Maybe be able to choose the continents in this graph?Et avoir seulement le texte en relation qui s’affiche???)

By beginning our observations by the 'old-continent' Europe, we observe that the number of conflicts is declining after the end of the IInd World War, to stagnate to almost no-conflicts for a long period. The Yugoslav war that begun in 1991 broke this period of peace that we continue to live with the recent conflicts in Eastern Europe with Russia.

Graph 3. Number of conflicts per year in Africa

The most important observation is that the conflicts seemed almost non-existant in Africa after the World War and began to took importance on the continent starting in 1952. This date also corresponds to the independence of Libya, the first country to achieve independence through the United Nations and one of the first former European possessions in Africa to gain independence. The number of conflicts reached a threshold around 1976, to which it stayed since then.

Graph 4. Number of conflicts per year in Asia

Asia appears as being consistently in conflicts since the end of the Second World War. Those may come from different origins: the former colonies of the Imperial Japan regaining independence, the Korean War, China’s expansion program through Nepal or disputed islands, the India-Pakistan war that is still alive today since the independence, and so on.

Graph 5. Number of conflicts per year in the Middle East

Conflicts in the Middle East are marked by waves of war and peace. The Six-Day War with Israel against other Arab countries can be observed in 1967. The Soviet-Afghan war can be observed in 1979, all the way to 1989. And now an escalation of tensions since the beginning of the war on Terrorism in 2001 and the instability it brought on the region.


Graph 6. Origin of conflicts in the World

The decolonization process often excluded the history of the previous state entities. They ignored the territorial claims and tribes divisions to draw lines on maps (mainly in Africa). Thus, we observe that in both 'colonized' continents, most of the conflicts emerge from territorial claims. Then, the instability of the local states and governments is highlighted by the high level of governmental conflicts, with new groups trying to reach powers in former colonies.

Graph 7. Conflicts per year and per colonizers (relier le pays où intervient le conflit avec le pays colonisateur -> la moyenne dont Jean parlait)

Different colonizers adopted different policies for the decolonization process. Without looking precisely at those policies, we try to observe the differences that occurred in the security stability of the former colonies. To Do: What do we observe?

Conclusion